Add ip filter design doc (#4990)
projectcontour/contour: design/ip-filtering-design.md

# IP Filtering 

Status: Draft

## Abstract

Allow or deny traffic to services behind contour with an IP allowlist or an IP denylist.

## Background

There have been [long standing requests](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/issues/62) to support some form of IP filtering.
IP filtering is a useful tool for network segregation that is supported by other ingress controllers like [ingress-nginx](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/blob/87d1b8bbf28265386b339e65d8943d8c3f8582ed/docs/user-guide/nginx-configuration/annotations.md#whitelist-source-range) and [ambassador](https://www.getambassador.io/docs/edge-stack/latest/topics/running/ambassador#ip-allow-and-deny), and is a [common](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/issues/62#issuecomment-698141472) [request](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/issues/62#issuecomment-843193956) among the community, often listed as a [blocker](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/issues/3693#issuecomment-1317049708) for adopting contour.

## Goals

- Support ip allowlists and denylists via Contour APIs.
- Support filtering on request IP or on forwarded IP (i.e. via `X-Forwarded-For`)

## Non Goals

> - Define Gateway API support for ip filtering. This is an obvious next step, but requires broader agreement.

Reviewer: we'll likely need to write up a design for a CR to be used as an extension Filter or Policy for Gateway API

Author: Are you saying that you think we should bring the Gateway API into scope? Or just that that's the likely direction if/when this is approached in for Gateway API?

Reviewer: a bit of both actually, probably good to get a baseline of what we want to support done in HTTPProxy as well as acknowledging that unless the upstream Gateway API project supports it natively we will have to write our own CR to handle that feature

## High-Level Design

The `route` section of an `HTTPProxy` will have two new fields added: `ipAllowPolicy` and `ipDenyPolicy`.

Example `HTTPProxy`:

```yaml
apiVersion: projectcontour.io/v1
kind: HTTPProxy
metadata:
  name: basic
spec:
  virtualhost:
    fqdn: foo-basic.bar.com

>   routes:

Author: I can test this - I'm not 100% sure what happens, but I would defer to whatever envoy does here.

>   routes:

Reviewer: based on how we program match conditions the more specific prefix will get the routing priority, so since we're using per-route filters the IP policy should be applied after the route is chosen

    - conditions:
      - prefix: /
      services:
        - name: s1
          port: 80
      ipAllowPolicy:
      # traffic is allowed if it came from localhost (i.e. co-located reverse proxy)
      - peer: 127.0.0.1
      # and the request originated from an IP in this range 
      - remote: 99.99.0.0/16
```

## Detailed Design

### API

`ipAllowPolicy`/`ipDenyPolicy` has the following structure:

```yaml
ipAllowPolicy:
- peer: 127.0.0.1
- remote: 99.99.0.0/16
```

```yaml
ipDenyPolicy:
- peer: 127.0.0.1 
- remote: 99.99.0.0/16
```

Note that:
- Allow rules cannot be mixed with Deny rules: it won't be evident if a deny rule should be an exception to an allow rule, or if an allow rule should be an exception to a deny rule.
- Multiple allow/deny CIDR ranges can be specified by repeating a key.

> - `peer` refers to the request IP

Reviewer: writing down how exactly these concepts fold into the Envoy RBAC configuration fields would be good to make sure to head off any confusion early

Author: Yep, I took that from Ambassador (it was linked in one of the original GH issues on ip filtering). I don't have a strong opinion on the fields names, if `direct_remote` and `remote` sound better.

Reviewer 2: > Is the terminology `peer` and `remote` originating from Ambassador? Envoy seems to use [`direct_remote_ip`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/rbac/v3/rbac.proto#envoy-v3-api-field-config-rbac-v3-principal-direct-remote-ip) and [`remote_ip`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/api-v3/config/rbac/v3/rbac.proto#envoy-v3-api-field-config-rbac-v3-principal-remote-ip). Which one is better to align?

I like the latter

## Goals

- Support ipv4 and ipv6 allowlists and denylists via Contour APIs.
- Support filtering on request IP or on forwarded IP (i.e. via `X-Forwarded-For`)

## Non Goals

- Define Gateway API support for ip filtering. This is an obvious next step, but requires broader agreement. 
- Define a global IP filter that works across multiple Routes or HTTPProxy objects.
- Supporting envoy's network rbac filter (this design is for the http filter only).

## High-Level Design

The `route` section of an `HTTPProxy` will have two new fields added: `ipAllowPolicy` and `ipDenyPolicy`.

Example `HTTPProxy`:

```yaml
apiVersion: projectcontour.io/v1
kind: HTTPProxy
metadata:
  name: basic
spec:
  virtualhost:

>     fqdn: foo-basic.bar.com

Reviewer 3: Could we support allow and deny IP list for virtualhost level?
```suggestion
    fqdn: foo-basic.bar.com
    ipAllowPolicy:
      # traffic is allowed if it came from localhost (i.e. co-located reverse proxy)
      - cidr: 127.0.0.1/32
        source: Peer
      # and the request originated from an IP in this range 
      - cidr: 99.99.0.0/16
        source: Remote
```

Reviewer 2: @ecordell

# IP Filtering 

> Status: Draft

Reviewer: can switch this to approved

## Abstract

Allow or deny traffic to services behind contour with an IP allowlist or an IP denylist.

## Background

There have been [long standing requests](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/issues/62) to support some form of IP filtering.
IP filtering is a useful tool for network segregation that is supported by other ingress controllers like [ingress-nginx](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/blob/87d1b8bbf28265386b339e65d8943d8c3f8582ed/docs/user-guide/nginx-configuration/annotations.md#whitelist-source-range) and [ambassador](https://www.getambassador.io/docs/edge-stack/latest/topics/running/ambassador#ip-allow-and-deny), and is a [common](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/issues/62#issuecomment-698141472) [request](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/issues/62#issuecomment-843193956) among the community, often listed as a [blocker](https://github.com/projectcontour/contour/issues/3693#issuecomment-1317049708) for adopting contour.

## Goals

- Support ipv4 and ipv6 allowlists and denylists via Contour APIs.

> - Support filtering on request IP or on forwarded IP (i.e. via `X-Forwarded-For`)

Reviewer 2: From the change log:
>Filters can indicate whether the direct IP should be used or whether a reported IP from `PROXY` or `X-Forwarded-For` should be used instead.

so what's about `PROXY`?

Author: > maybe we need to unify them all

Not sure I'm following your suggestion, would you mind rephrasing it?

Reviewer 2: sorry for my pool english, i means the descriptions in these two places need to be consistent

## Non Goals

- Define Gateway API support for ip filtering. This is an obvious next step, but requires broader agreement. 
- Define a global IP filter that works across multiple Routes or HTTPProxy objects.
- Supporting envoy's network rbac filter (this design is for the http filter only).

## High-Level Design

> The `route` section of an `HTTPProxy` will have two new fields added: `ipAllowPolicy` and `ipDenyPolicy`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `virtualhost` and `route` sections of an `HTTPProxy` will each have two new fields added: `ipAllowPolicy` and `ipDenyPolicy`.
```

      - prefix: /
      services:
        - name: s1
          port: 80
      # route-level ip filters overrides the virtualhost-level filters
      ipAllowPolicy:
      # traffic is allowed if it came from localhost (i.e. co-located reverse proxy)
      - cidr: 127.0.0.1/32
        source: Peer
      # and the request originated from an IP in this range 
      - cidr: 99.99.0.0/16
        source: Remote
```

## Detailed Design

### API

`ipAllowPolicy`/`ipDenyPolicy` has the following structure:

```yaml
ipAllowPolicy:
  - cidr: 127.0.0.1/32
    source: Peer
  - cidr: 99.99.0.0/16
    source: Remote
```

```yaml
ipDenyPolicy:
  - cidr: 127.0.0.1/32
    source: Peer
  - cidr: 99.99.0.0/16
    source: Remote
```

Note that:
- Allow rules deny all requests that don't match a rule.
- Deny rules allow all requests that don't match a rule.
- Rules defined on the virtualhost can be overridden by rules defined on a route.
- Allow rules cannot be mixed with Deny rules: it won't be evident if a deny rule should be an exception to an allow rule, or if an allow rule should be an exception to a deny rule.
- Multiple allow/deny CIDR ranges can be specified by repeating a key.

> - `Peer` refers to the request IP

Reviewer 2: `Peer`/`Remote` OR `direct_remote_ip`/`remote_ip` ?
